# SR2022Malnutrition
Ay Lab, Colgate University\
Summer 2022\
Jim Perry, Will Russel

This is an open-source data science script developed by research students at Colgate University, designed to employ various machine learning and statistical methods to analyze a 2013 dataset on the prevalence of three types of malnutrition (stunting, thinness, underweight) in Ethiopian schoolchildren. These methods include imputation of missing/unanswered survey data through the kNN algorithm (and cross-tested with RandomForest imputation), one hot encoding of categorical variables, various feature selection methods (Multivariate Logistic Regression, Chi-Square test, mRMR, JMI, Monte-Carlo), further linear and logistic regressions for odds ratio calculations, and finding rules in data through both the  Classification and Regression Trees (CART) and the Apriori Assocation Rule Learning algorithms. These analyses are carried out on both general data and selected subsets of interest: these include Male/Female, Urban/Rural, and Youth/Adolescent (respectively >10 and >=10 years old). This subset analysis was performed on groups of positive samples for the three types of malnutrition tested. Original survey data is available upon reasonable request.

*INSTRUCTIONS FOR RUNNING:*

  1. Install RStudio and/or make sure it's up-to-date.
  2. Download and unzip this repository.
  3. Open "Malnutrition Masterscript.Rmd" in RStudio.
  4. Run "Malnutrition Masterscript". You can press ctrl+shift+R to run everything at once. Alternatively, you can click on specific chunks and use ctrl + shift + enter to run the entire block. Necessary packages are automatically installed at this step, as they're the first segment of code run.
  5. (OPTIONAL) Adjust number of features selected on line 931. Default is 10.
  6. Run "Malnutrition Masterscript". You can press ctrl+shift+R to run everything at once. Alternatively, you can click on specific chunks and use ctrl + shift + enter to run the entire block.

*ACCESSING RESULTS:*

Feature selection is run on three response variable sets (stunting, thinness, and underweight/wasting), each of which contains seven subsets (full data, Urban-only, Non-urban-only, Male-only, Female-only, Youth-only (ages 10 and under), and Adolescent-only (ages 11 and older). Wasting can only be calculated for youths, so it does not contain a Youth or Adolescent split. Most results are stored in intuitive but layered data.frames in RStudio. These data.frames are stored in RStudio's environment, and are as follows:
  - "TopFeatures" holds the top n features (as determined by input on line 931, default is 10) for a specific subset as determined by various feature selection methods. For example, to find significant features for stunting in males, open "TopFeatures" from the RStudio environment iterate through "Stunting" ==> "Male".
  - "LinResults" holds results for linear regression runs. It is structured similarly to "TopFeatures" e.g. to find significant features for thinness in females according to stepwise multivariate linear regression, you open "LinResults" from the RStudio environment and iterate through "Thinness" ==> "Female".
  - "RegResults" holds results for multivariate logistic regressions on overall subsets. We used this to determine odds ratios and confidence intervals, while the regression in "TopFeatures" was done for just feature selection. It is structed similarly to "TopFeatures" and "LinResults".
  - Association Rule Learning results are written to a .csv file titled "Association_Rules.csv". It is stored in the same folder as the result of the files.
  - "RiskResults" holds Chi-Square test results (odds ratios, 95% confidence intervals, p-values and adjusted p-values) for risk factor groups determined by Association Rule Learning. Each of the three response variable sets (stunting, thinness, wasting/underweight) has several rulesets associated with them; specific rules can be obtained by opening "RiskResults" and hovering over the name of the set e.g. the first stunting ruleset is "HousePet_DontUseTP_Chicken_ ==> Stunting". Opening the ruleset shows the odds ratio (under "measure", in the order of estimate --> lower bound --> upper bound), p-value, and adjusted p-value according to Yate's continuity correction.
  - "CART" holds rules found in data by the CART algorithm. These can be accessed similarly to previous results, parsing through by both affliction and subset (e.g. "Stunting" ==> "Urban", or "CART[["Stunting"]][["Urban"]]") to arrive at the dataframe holding the results. The CART section already prints the visualization of these rules as a graph, but it can also be done on request by saving this DataFrame with the rules and running "rpart.plot(CART[["Stunting"]][["Urban"]])" in the terminal.

*CONTEXT FOR DATA COLLECTION:*

This project was carried out in Jimma Town, Ethiopia. Jimma is located 352km southwest of Addis Ababa with an altitude of 2,450 m above sea level and average temperatures ranging from 15°C to 18°C (Fig. 1). In this area, there is a low level of sanitation practiced and many households lack access to clean drinking water. The zone studied covered in this study included 14 public elementary schools, all of which were surveyed, resulting in a total of 1036 student participants (498 males, 538 females) (Fig. 1). Students were randomly selected and had parental consent to participate after a complete explanation of the experiment and objective. Each parent was given adequate time to think about and discuss their decision as to whether they wanted their child to participate. Data was collected in a 2013 survey titled “Understanding gut-microbiome interactions following mass deworming against soil-transmitted helminths (STHs) among young Ethiopian schoolchildren.” The survey included a series of yes/no questions relating to sociodemographic and behavioral factors in addition to pertinent medical history including but not limited to sickness, receiving a deworming drug, and BCG vaccination status. The survey also included anthropometric measures used to calculate malnutrition outcomes.
